China’s trade reforms

        The Chinese government has announced a set of free trade measures, including lower
         import tariffs on cars, soybeans and pharmaceuticals, in an attempt to end a trade war with
         the United States (US).

        The US government has long accused China of engaging in unfair trade practices to
         maintain their current account surplus. The trade dispute between the two largest economies
         intensified when the US said it would impose anti-dumping tariffs on Chinese steel
         and aluminium.

        The trade war with the US comes at a bad time given the slowdown in China’s domestic
         demand. In recent years, China’s economic growth has relied less on investment and exports
         and more on consumption expenditure.

        Producers of many Chinese manufactured goods currently benefit from protectionist
         measures. In particular, imports of industrial equipment, medical devices, tractors and
         vehicles are subject to high tariffs.

        Automobile production capacity in China is growing. However, the domestic market is
         becoming oversupplied, with more cars being offered for sale than Chinese consumers want
         to buy. For this reason, Chinese car manufacturers are seeking to export their cars to other
         markets. They are therefore eager to see reduced trade tensions as increased US tariffs
         would make it harder to export Chinese cars to the US.

        Some Chinese car manufacturers are already focusing on adding advanced capabilities to
         their cars in order to be more competitive in global markets. China is increasing its efforts
         to become a world leader in self-driving cars. These will be intelligent cars that will improve
         transport efficiency and meet energy-saving and emission-reduction targets. Many believe
         that Chinese companies are so innovative that they no longer require protection from
         international enterprises.

        However, many Chinese firms remain dependent on imported factors of production.
         Approximately 30 % of Chinese exports are manufactured using imported equipment and
         components. The reduction of tariffs would therefore lower prices not only for producers but
         also for consumers of Chinese goods.



(This question continues on the following page)
                                                –3–                                         2221 – 5113


(Question 1 continued)

     (a)   (i)	Define the term trade war indicated in bold in the text (paragraph ).[2]

           (ii)   Define the term consumption indicated in bold in the text (paragraph ).[2]

     (b)   Using an international trade diagram, explain how US tariffs could affect the export of
           Chinese steel and aluminium to the US (paragraph ).[4]

     (c)   Using a demand and supply diagram, explain how reduced tariffs on “imported factors
           of production” would affect the price of Chinese goods (paragraph ).[4]

     (d)   Using information from the text/data and your knowledge of economics, evaluate the
           impacts of free trade measures on China’s economy.                                      [8]




                                                                                           Turn over
                                                     –4–                                           2221 – 5113