(a)   (i)    Define the term excess demand indicated in bold in the text
                  (paragraph ).                                                             [2]

       Level                                                                         Marks
       0          The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors     0
                  below.
       1          Vague definition.                                                  1
                  Demand exceeds supply.
       2          Accurate definition.                                               2
                  The situation where (at a given price) quantity demanded
                  exceeds quantity supplied.

           (ii)   Define the term structural unemployment indicated in bold in the text
                  (paragraph ).                                                             [2]

       Level                                                                         Marks
       0          The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors     0
                  below.
       1          Vague definition.                                                  1
                  For an explanation that it is a situation where some workers are
                  willing to work (seeking employment) but do not have a job.
       2          Accurate definition.                                               2
                  Occurs due to one of the following:
                   a mismatch between skills of workers and the jobs available
                   a mismatch between the geographical location of the
                       workers and the jobs available
                   a permanent fall in the demand for a skill (demand for
                       labour).
                                             –4–       M19/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(b)   Using a supply and demand diagram and data from the text, explain how a
      “disequilibrium in the domestic US tinplate steel market" would occur if there
      were no imports (paragraph ).                                                      [4]

  Level                                                                         Marks
  0        The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors       0
           below.
  1        There is a correct diagram OR an accurate written response.          1–2
           For drawing a correctly labelled market diagram, with a price
           below the equilibrium, and an excess demand clearly labelled in
           some way OR for an explanation that in the domestic market,
           there is a disequilibrium because there is one of the following:
             a shortage of 0.9 million tons
             demand of 2.1 million tons and supply of only 1.2 million tons
             only 57% of domestic demand was met.
  2        There is a correct diagram AND an accurate written response.         3–4
           For drawing a correctly labelled market diagram, with a price
           below the equilibrium, and an excess demand clearly labelled in
           some way AND for an explanation that in the domestic market,
           there is a disequilibrium because there is one of the following:
             a shortage of 0.9 million tons
             demand of 2.1 million tons and supply of only 1.2 million tons
             only 57% of domestic demand was met.

      Candidates who incorrectly label diagrams can be awarded a maximum of [3].

      For a supply and demand diagram, the vertical axis should be price or p. The horizontal
      axis should be quantity or q. A title is not necessary.
               Price
                                                 S

                    P

                                                   D
                                                               Quantity
                               Qs           Qd
                                              –5–      M19/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(c)   Using an international trade diagram, explain the effect of a tariff on the imports
      of tinplate steel (paragraph ).                                                      [4]

  Level                                                                            Marks
  0        The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors          0
           below.
  1        There is a correct diagram OR an accurate written response.             1–2
           For drawing a correctly labelled trade diagram, with an upward
           shift of the world supply curve, an increase in price, and a fall in
           the level of imports OR for an explanation that a tariff will result
           in an increase in the price of tinplate steel and hence a fall in the
           quantity of imports due to an increase in the domestic quantity
           supplied (and/or decrease in quantity demanded).
  2        There is a correct diagram AND an accurate written response.            3–4
           For drawing a correctly labelled trade diagram, with an upward
           shift of the world supply curve, an increase in price, and a fall in
           the level of imports AND for an explanation that a tariff will result
           in an increase in the price of tinplate steel and hence a fall in the
           quantity of imports due to an increase in the domestic quantity
           supplied (and/or decrease in quantity demanded).

      Candidates who incorrectly label diagrams can be awarded a maximum of [3].

      The use of P and Q on the axes is sufficient for a demand and supply diagram.
      The world supply curve must be labelled Sw, or Sworld. A title is not necessary.

            Price
                                                                  Sd

                                                                       Sworld + tariff
          Pw+t

            Pw                                                         Sworld

                                                                          Dd

                    Q1      Q2                  Q3           Q4                 Quantity
                                           –6–      M19/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(d)   Using information from the text/data and your knowledge of economics, discuss
      possible economic impacts of the tariff on tinplate steel.                         [8]

      Examiners should be aware that candidates may take a different approach which,
      if appropriate, should be rewarded.

      Do not award beyond level 2 if the answer does not contain reference to the
      information provided.

  Level                                                                      Marks
  0        The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors    0
           below.
  1        Few relevant concepts are recognized.                             1–2
           There is basic knowledge/understanding.
  2        Relevant concepts are recognized and developed in reasonable      3–5
           depth.
           There is clear knowledge/understanding.
           There is some attempt at application/analysis.
  3        Relevant concepts are recognized and developed in reasonable      6–8
           depth.
           There is clear knowledge/understanding.
           There is effective application/analysis.
           There is synthesis/evaluation, supported by appropriate theory
           and evidence.

      Command term
      “Discuss” requires candidates to offer a considered and balanced review that includes
      a range of arguments, factors, or hypotheses. Opinions or conclusions should be
      presented clearly and supported by appropriate evidence.
                                      –7–     M19/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

Responses may include:
 definition of tariff
 international trade diagram to explain impact of the requested tariff on consumers,
  producers, government, importers and efficiency (paragraph ).

Possible impacts:
 some candidates may question the claims of the CMI, noting that they have a vested
  interest in tinplate steel being exempted from a tariff (paragraph )
 severe economic impacts on the tin can manufacturing industry (paragraph )
 job losses and potential structural unemployment in the tin can industry (paragraphs
   and )
 inefficient domestic tinplate steel producers are supported (paragraph ), causing a
  misallocation of resources
 the inferior “quality of domestically-produced tinplate steel” (paragraph ) may
  result in a decline in quality and higher price of final products
 tariff allows domestic steel tinplate producers to maintain higher revenues / incomes
  to allow them to compete with higher quality imports (paragraph )
 higher input prices for can manufacturers may force closures of some can producers
  and a consolidation within the tin can industry (paragraph )
 tariff will increase input costs for can manufacturers requiring tinplate steel as an
  input (paragraph )
 tin can producers disadvantaged when substitute packaging is not exposed to a
  tariff (paragraph )
 impact on economic growth in communities dependent on tin can manufacturing
  (paragraph )
 impact on low-income households as tariffs are regressive taxes and food is a
  staple; low income households spend a higher proportion of their income on canned
  food (paragraph )
 trading partners might retaliate by imposing their own protectionist measures
 tariffs provide a source of tax revenue that can be reinvested
 as domestic production can only meet 57% of domestic demand, it might take
  a substantial increase in price to resolve the shortage (paragraph )
 may affect the competitiveness of US exports, which require tin-plate steel as
  a factor input.
                                                  –8–     M19/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M