United States (US) tin can manufacturers seek tariff exemption on tinplate steel

          The Can Manufacturers Institute (CMI) has asked the US Department of Commerce to
           take away tariffs and other trade protection measures that are currently applied to imports
           of tinplate steel. Tinplate steel is used to make tin cans as packaging for food. The CMI
           represents the tin can manufacturing industry and its suppliers in the US.

          The tin can manufacturing industry accounts for the annual domestic production of
           approximately 124 billion tin cans. The industry employs more than 28 000 people, with
           factories in 33 US states, Puerto Rico and American Samoa. It generates revenue of around
           US$17.8 billion. The CMI claims that the tariff on imports of tinplate steel has a severe
           economic impact on the tin can manufacturing industry.

          Approximately 2 % of all US steel is tinplate. Currently, there is excess demand that is
           causing a disequilibrium in the domestic US tinplate steel market. In 2016, US demand for
           tinplate steel was 2.1 million tons, while domestic supply was 1.2 million tons, meaning that
           only 57 % of domestic demand was met by US tinplate steel producers. Not only is there a
           domestic shortage of tinplate steel, but also the CMI claims that there has been a noticeable
           decline in the quality of domestically-produced tinplate steel.

          The CMI claims that even a small increase in the price of raw materials could create a
           competitive disadvantage, forcing some tin can manufacturing plants to shut down. This
           would create structural unemployment for 10 000 workers in regionally-based factories.
           The CMI also claims that the tariff puts food can producers at a competitive disadvantage
           with other food packaging substitutes, such as plastic and glass. These substitutes are not
           subject to tariffs.

          According to the CMI, canned fruits and vegetables cost 20 % less than fresh food. Because
           of this, people on low incomes consume canned foods at a higher rate than the average
           American. Canned food offers a low-cost solution to feeding the nation; especially the 42
           million Americans who live in low-income households. The figure includes 13 million children.
           The CMI further claims that tariffs, or any trade barriers, have harsh consequences for those
           living in relative poverty.


                          [Source: adapted from www.prnewswire.com, accessed 27 August 2017]




(This question continues on the following page)
                                                  –3–                 M19/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

(Question 1 continued)

     (a)   (i)	Define the term excess demand indicated in bold in the text (paragraph ).[2]

           (ii)   Define the term structural unemployment indicated in bold in the text (paragraph ).[2]

     (b)    Using a supply and demand diagram and data from the text, explain how a
           “disequilibrium in the domestic US tinplate steel market” would occur if there were no
            imports (paragraph ).[4]

     (c)   Using an international trade diagram, explain the effect of a tariff on the imports of
           tinplate steel (paragraph ).[4]

     (d)   Using information from the text/data and your knowledge of economics, discuss
           possible economic impacts of the tariff on tinplate steel.                                 [8]




                                                                                               Turn over
                                                 –4–                 M19/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX