(a)   Explain why common access resources, such as fishing grounds, might
           become depleted in the absence of a price mechanism.                              [10 marks]

           Answers may include:
           • definition of common access resources and price mechanism
           • explanation of the price mechanism to show how supply and demand ration
             scarce resources through the signalling and incentive functions of price; how
             the lack of a pricing mechanism is likely to lead to overuse/depletion
           • diagrams to illustrate the allocative function of the price mechanism
           • examples of common access resources, for example, common grazing land,
             the atmosphere.
                                            –7–              M13/3/ECONO/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M

                                    Assessment Criteria
Part (a) 10 marks

Level                                                                               Marks

  0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.            0

  1 There is little understanding of the specific demands of the question.
    Relevant economic terms are not defined.
    There is very little knowledge of relevant economic theory.
    There are significant errors.                                                    1–3

  2 There is some understanding of the specific demands of the question.
    Some relevant economic terms are defined.
    There is some knowledge of relevant economic theory.
    There are some errors.                                                           4–6

  3 There is understanding of the specific demands of the question.
    Relevant economic terms are defined.
    Relevant economic theory is explained and applied.
    Where appropriate, diagrams are included and applied.
    Where appropriate, examples are used.
    There are few errors.                                                            7–8

  4 There is clear understanding of the specific demands of the question.
    Relevant economic terms are clearly defined.
    Relevant economic theory is clearly explained and applied.
    Where appropriate, diagrams are included and applied effectively.
    Where appropriate, examples are used effectively.
    There are no significant errors.                                                 9–10
                                            –8–              M13/3/ECONO/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M

(b)   Evaluate the view that carbon taxes represent the most effective
      government response to the threat to sustainability posed by the use of
      fossil fuels.                                                                     [15 marks]

      N.B. It should be noted that definitions, theory and examples that have already
      been given in part (a), and then referred to in part (b), should be rewarded.

      Answers may include:
      • definitions of sustainability, carbon taxes and fossil fuels
      • explanation of relevant strategies in terms of carbon taxes, legislation, cap
        and trade schemes and funding for clean technologies
      • diagrams to show resource depletion and/or over-use, diagrams to illustrate
        government responses
      • examples of where such responses have occurred, or might occur
      • synthesis or evaluation.

      Evaluation may include: the positive and negative consequences of the use of
      carbon taxes; the positive and negative consequences of other schemes such as
      legislation, cap and trade schemes and funding for clean technologies;
      discussion of the significance of the global nature of the problem, the lack of
      ownership of common access resources and the need for international
      cooperation; consideration of whether carbon taxes are the most effective
      response.

      Examiners should be aware that candidates may take a different approach
      which, if appropriate, should be rewarded.

      Opinions or conclusions should be presented clearly and supported by
      appropriate examples.
                                            –9–              M13/3/ECONO/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M

                                    Assessment Criteria
Part (b) 15 marks

Level                                                                             Marks

  0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.          0

  1 There is little understanding of the specific demands of the question.
    Relevant economic terms are not defined.
    There is very little knowledge of relevant economic theory.
    There are significant errors.                                                  1–5

  2 There is some understanding of the specific demands of the question.
    Some relevant economic terms are defined.
    There is some knowledge of relevant economic theory.
    There are some errors.                                                         6–9

  3 There is understanding of the specific demands of the question.
    Relevant economic terms are defined.
    Relevant economic theory is explained and applied.
    Where appropriate, diagrams are included and applied.
    Where appropriate, examples are used.
    There is an attempt at synthesis or evaluation.
    There are few errors.                                                         10–12

  4 There is clear understanding of the specific demands of the question.
    Relevant economic terms are clearly defined.
    Relevant economic theory is clearly explained and applied.
    Where appropriate, diagrams are included and applied effectively.
    Where appropriate, examples are used effectively.
    There is evidence of appropriate synthesis or evaluation.
    There are no significant errors.                                              13–15
                                               – 10 –           M13/3/ECONO/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M

                                            SECTION B

Macroeconomics