The fall of the Indian rupee

          Over the past year, India’s current account deficit widened as the 14 % increase in export
           revenue could not offset the rise in import expenditure. Over the same period, the value of
           the rupee (India’s currency) has fallen by 13 %.

          The rise in import expenditure was in part caused by higher oil prices following production
           cuts by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC). Another reason for
           the increase in import expenditure was the higher spending on machinery and capital goods
           needed to achieve economic growth.

          Exports of services, especially software services, have helped to boost export revenue.
           However, one critical weakness in India’s exports of services is the lack of diversification.
           Exports of software services account for more than 41 % of India’s total service exports and
           more than 90 % of its software service exports are restricted to the United States and the
           European Union.

          The depreciation of the rupee, one of the steepest seen in recent years, has resulted in
           fears of high inflation. An economist at the Reserve Bank of India (India’s central bank) has
           warned that the increase in oil prices and consumers’ expectations of rising inflation could
           worsen inflationary pressures.

           Despite calls for an increase in interest rates in order to protect the rupee from further
            depreciation, the Reserve Bank of India has chosen to keep interest rates unchanged. The
            combined effect of a fall in confidence and higher interest rates would dampen economic
            growth.


                              Table 1: Selected economic indicators for India

                                                                    2016           2017          2018

     Inflation rate (%)                                              4.5              3.6         4.7

     Real gross domestic product (GDP) growth rate (%)               7.1              6.7         7.3




(This question continues on the following page)
                                                –5–                                            2221 – 5113


(Question 2 continued)

     (a)   (i)	Define the term current account indicated in bold in the text (paragraph ).[2]

           (ii)   Define the term depreciation indicated in bold in the text (paragraph ).[2]

     (b)   Using an AD/AS diagram, explain how an increase in oil prices “could worsen
           inflationary pressures” (paragraph ).[4]

     (c)   Using an exchange rate diagram, explain how higher interest rates could “protect the
           rupee from further depreciation” (paragraph ).[4]

     (d)   Using information from the text/data and your knowledge of economics, discuss the
           possible economic consequences on the Indian economy of a depreciating rupee.              [8]




                                                                                           Turn over
                                                   –6–                                            2221 – 5113


                                               Section B