Full marks are not necessarily awarded for a correct answer with no working. Answers must be supported by working and/or explanations. Solutions found from a graphic display calculator should be supported by suitable working. For example, if graphs are used to find a solution, you should sketch these as part of your answer. Where an answer is incorrect, some marks may be given for a correct method, provided this is shown by written working. You are therefore advised to show all working.

Section A
Answer all questions. Answers must be written within the answer boxes provided. Working may be continued below the lines, if necessary.

1. [Maximum mark: 7]
In Lucy's music academy, eight students took their piano diploma examination and achieved scores out of 150. For her records, Lucy decided to record the average number of hours per week each student reported practising in the weeks prior to their examination. These results are summarized in the table below.

Average weekly practice time (h)  28  13  45  33  17  29  39  36
Diploma score (D)                115  82 120 116  79 101 110 121

(a) Find Pearson's product-moment correlation coefficient, r, for these data. [2]

(b) The relationship between the variables can be modelled by the regression equation D = ah + b. Write down the value of a and the value of b. [1] 

(c) One of these eight students was disappointed with her result and wished she had practised an extra five hours per week. Based on the given data, determine how her score could have been expected to alter had she practised an extra five hours per week. [2]

(d) Lucy asserts that the number of hours a student practises has a direct effect on their final diploma result. Comment on the validity of Lucy's assertion. [1]

Lucy suspected that each student had not been practising as much as they reported. In order to compensate for this, Lucy deducted a fixed number of hours per week from each of the students' recorded hours.

(e) State how, if at all, the value of r would be affected. [1]

(This question continues on the following page)