Here is the text extracted from the image, preserving the structure and formatting:

-2-
N16/5/MATHL/HP3/ENG/TZ0/SP

Please start each question on a new page. Full marks are not necessarily awarded for a correct answer
with no working. Answers must be supported by working and/or explanations. In particular, solutions
found from a graphic display calculator should be supported by suitable working. For example, if
graphs are used to find a solution, you should sketch these as part of your answer. Where an answer
is incorrect, some marks may be given for a correct method, provided this is shown by written working.
You are therefore advised to show all working.

1. [Maximum mark: 17]

In this question you may assume that these data are a random sample from a bivariate
normal distribution, with population product moment correlation coefficient r.
Richard wishes to do some research on two types of exams which are taken by a large
number of students. He takes a random sample of the results of 10 students, which are
shown in the following table.

Student A B C D E F G H I J
Exam 1 51 70 10 22 99 33 45 8 65 82
Exam 2 52 64 8 25 90 43 50 50 70 50

(a) For these data find the product moment correlation coefficient, r. [2]

Using these data, it is decided to test, at the 1% level, the null hypothesis H0: r = 0 against
the alternative hypothesis H1: r > 0.

(b) (i) State the distribution of the test statistic (including any parameters).
(ii) Find the p-value for the test.
(iii) State the conclusion, in the context of the question, with the word "correlation" in
your answer. Justify your answer. [6]

Richard decides to take the exams himself. He scored 11 on Exam 1 but his result on
Exam 2 was lost.

(c) Using a suitable regression line, find an estimate for his score on Exam 2, giving your
answer to the nearest integer. [3]

Caroline believes that the population mean mark on Exam 2 is 6 marks higher than the
population mean mark on Exam 1. Using the original data from the 10 students, it is decided
to test, at the 5% level, this hypothesis against the alternative hypothesis that the mean of
the differences, d = exam 2 mark - exam 1 mark, is less than 6 marks.

(d) (i) State the distribution of your test statistic (including any parameters).
(ii) Find the p-value.
(iii) State the conclusion, justifying the answer. [6]