(a)   (i)    Define the term concessional long-term loans indicated in bold in the text
                  (paragraph ).                                                                  [2]

       Level                                                                         Marks
       0          The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors     0
                  below.
       1          Vague definition.                                                  1
                  For stating any one of the following:
                   a form of aid (to finance development projects)
                   very low (below market rate) or zero rate of interest
                   repayments are stretched over a long time period (25 to 40
                     years)
                   may include a grace period
                   may be repayable in local currency.
       2          Accurate definition.                                               2
                  For stating any two of the following:
                   a form of aid (to finance development projects)
                   very low (below market rate) or zero rate of interest
                   repayments are stretched over a long time period (25 to 40
                     years)
                   may include a grace period
                   may be repayable in local currency.

           (ii)   Define the term real gross domestic product (GDP) indicated in bold in the text
                  (paragraph ).                                                                  [2]

       Level                                                                         Marks
       0          The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors     0
                  below.
       1          Vague definition.                                                  1
                  An explanation that it is national income (output produced in an
                  economy.
       2          Accurate definition.                                               2
                  The (total) value of all output (goods and services) produced in
                  an economy (over a given period of time) adjusted for inflation
                  (changes in price level).
                                            – 14 –   M19/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(b)   Explain two possible disadvantages for Bhutan in receiving India’s tied aid
      (paragraph ).                                                                   [4]

  Level                                                                        Marks
  0        The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors      0
           below.
  1        The written response is limited.                                    1–2
           For an explanation of one disadvantage.
           Possible disadvantages of tied aid include:
            does not necessarily allow the purchase of the cheapest
              products
            may not be invested in a way that increases domestic supply
            may cause a decrease in domestic supply as imports
              compete with domestic production
            may not lead to increased employment opportunities
            may be using inferior quality material or labour being supplied
              by the donor country
            may limit choice
            may make Bhutan dependent on Indian imports
            may subject Bhutan to political exploitation by India
            may result in inappropriate technology being used.
  2        The written response is accurate.                                   3–4
           For an explanation of two disadvantages.
           Possible disadvantages of tied aid include:
            does not necessarily allow the purchase of the cheapest
              products
            may not be invested in a way that increases domestic supply
            may cause a decrease in domestic supply as imports
              compete with domestic production
            may not lead to increased employment opportunities
            may be using inferior quality material or labour being supplied
              by the donor country
            may limit choice
            may make Bhutan dependent on Indian imports
            may subject Bhutan to political exploitation by India
            may result in inappropriate technology being used.
                                           – 15 –   M19/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(c)   Using a production possibilities curve (PPC) diagram, explain how rising numbers
      of university graduates will affect Bhutan’s potential output (paragraph ).         [4]

       Level                                                                       Marks
       0       The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors      0
               below.
       1       There is a correct diagram OR an accurate written response.         1–2
               For drawing a correctly labelled PPC diagram showing an
               outward shift of the PPC and indication of the movement from
               one curve to the other OR for an explanation that rising numbers
               of university graduates means an increase in the quality and/or
               quantity of labour, thereby causing an increase in Bhutan’s
               potential output.
       2       There is a correct diagram AND an accurate written response.        3–4
               For drawing a correctly labelled PPC diagram showing an
               outward shift of the PPC and indication of the movement from
               one curve to the other AND for an explanation that rising
               numbers of university graduates means an increase in the
               quality and/or quantity of labour, thereby causing an increase in
               Bhutan’s potential output.

      Candidates who incorrectly label diagrams can be awarded a maximum of [3].

      For a PPC diagram, there must be two goods or groups of goods competing for
      the same resources on the axes. Good X and Good Y are appropriate, but simply
      X and Y are not sufficient.

                     Capital goods

                                                           Consumption goods
                                            – 16 –    M19/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(d)   Using information from the text/data and your knowledge of economics, evaluate
      the government policies being used to promote economic development in Bhutan.      [8]

      Examiners should be aware that candidates may take a different approach which,
      if appropriate, should be rewarded.

      Do not award beyond level 2 if the answer does not contain reference to the
      information provided.

  Level                                                                          Marks
  0        The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors        0
           below.
  1        Few relevant concepts are recognized.                                 1–2
           There is basic knowledge/understanding.
  2        Relevant concepts are recognized and developed in reasonable          3–5
           depth.
           There is clear knowledge/understanding.
           There is some attempt at application/analysis.
  3        Relevant concepts are recognized and developed in reasonable          6–8
           depth.
           There is clear knowledge/understanding.
           There is effective application/analysis.
           There is synthesis/evaluation, supported by appropriate theory
           and evidence.

      Command term
      “Evaluate” requires candidates to make an appraisal by weighing up the
      strengths and limitations. Opinions and conclusions should be presented clearly
      and supported with appropriate evidence and sound argument.

      Responses may include:
       definition of economic development
       definition of any of the government policies mentioned in the discussion
        (interventionist supply-side policies, diversification, deregulation, etc).

      Strengths of policies:
       may reduce market failure through the provision of hydroelectricity
         (paragraph )
       increased power supplies (paragraph )
       exploiting hydropower generates government revenue (paragraph )
       increasing export revenue, helping to achieve high GDP growth rates of 11.7%
         (paragraph )
       number of university graduates is growing each year, supporting an increase
         in quality of labour (paragraph )
       creation of government jobs reduces unemployment (paragraph )
       government is promoting tourism which may diversify the economy away from
         over-reliance on hydroelectricity (paragraph )
       potential growth of private sector with more graduates (paragraph )
       promotion of tourism as an alternative to government employment
         (paragraph )
       deregulation leading to increased FDI (paragraph )
       promotion of agriculture as an alternative to government employment
         (paragraph ).
                                      – 17 –   M19/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

Limitations of policies:
 overdependence on India for funding, creating a significant government debt,
  118% of real GDP (paragraph )
 high debt means burden to future generations (paragraph )
 overdependence on tied aid and Indian companies leading the work
  (paragraph )
 the provision of government jobs may lead to crowding out in the private
  sector (paragraph )
 returns on investment in human capital may be muted if graduates leave the
  country due to the lack of employment opportunities (paragraph )
 emphasis on agriculture may result in limited growth opportunities for exports
  in the future, because in competition with many other economies and low
  income elasticities of demand for primary products.

To reach level 3, students must clearly link their arguments to specific government
policies undertaken by the government of Bhutan.
                                                   – 18 –   M19/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M