(a)   (i)    State two functions of the World Trade Organization (WTO) (paragraph 1).         [2]

            Level                                                                          Marks
            0         The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors       0
                      below.
            1         Vague definition.                                                    1
                      One function is stated OR two functions are partially stated.
            2         Accurate definition.                                                 2
                      A clear understanding demonstrated by listing two of the
                      following functions of the WTO for its member countries:
                       • to set and enforce rules for international trade
                       • to provide a forum for negotiating trade liberalization
                       • to monitor further trade liberalization
                       • to resolve trade disputes
                       • to increase the transparency of decision-making processes
                       • to help developing countries benefit fully from the global
                           trading system.

           (ii)   Define the term inflation indicated in bold in the text (paragraph 2).           [2]

            Level                                                                          Marks
            0         The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors       0
                      below.
            1         Vague definition.                                                    1
                      The idea that it is an increase in prices.
            2         Accurate definition.                                                 2
                      An understanding that it is a sustained increase in the
                      (average/general) price level.
                                           – 20 –              N20/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(b)   Using a Lorenz curve diagram, explain the possible impact on the distribution of income in
      the Philippines when “the income tax for the highest income earners has been raised from
      30% to 35%” (paragraph 4).                                                                 [4]

       Level                                                                       Marks
       0       The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors      0
               below.
       1       There is a correct diagram OR an accurate written response.         1–2
               A Lorenz curve diagram with 2 curves showing a shift closer to
               the line of perfect income equality OR an explanation that an
               increase of the tax rate in the highest income tax bracket makes
               it more progressive/reduces the disposable income of highest
               income earners/shifts the curve closer to the diagonal, thereby
               achieving greater income equality/resulting in greater equity in
               the distribution of income (decreasing inequality).
       2       There is a correct diagram AND an accurate written response.        3–4
               A Lorenz curve diagram with 2 curves showing a shift closer to
               the line of perfect income equality AND an explanation that an
               increase of the tax rate in the highest income tax bracket makes
               it more progressive/reduces the disposable income of highest
               income earners/shifts the curve closer to the diagonal, thereby
               achieving greater income equality/resulting in greater equity in
               the distribution of income (decreasing inequality).

      Candidates who incorrectly label diagrams can be awarded a maximum of [3].

      For the vertical axis, the label may be cumulative percentage of (national) income or
      percentage of (national) income (GDP and GNI are valid alternatives to income but wealth is
      not acceptable). For the horizontal axis, the label may be cumulative
      percentage of population/people/households or percentage of
      population/people/households. A title is not necessary.
                                             – 21 –              N20/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(c)   Using an AD/AS diagram, explain the impact on the potential output of the Philippines
      of the government increasing its “spending on new airports, roads and bridges”
      (paragraph 4).                                                                           [4]

       Level                                                                         Marks
       0        The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors       0
                below.
       1        There is a correct diagram OR an accurate written response.          1–2
                An AD/AS diagram showing an increase in LRAS OR for
                explaining that increasing spending on infrastructure means that
                it
                 • increases (the quantity and quality of) factors of production
                   OR
                 • increases efficiency/productivity

                 shifting LRAS to the right, thereby increasing potential output.
       2        There is a correct diagram AND an accurate written response.         3–4
                An AD/AS diagram showing an increase in LRAS AND for
                explaining that increasing spending on infrastructure means that
                it
                 • increases (the quantity and quality of) factors of production
                    OR
                 • increases efficiency/productivity

                shifting LRAS to the right, thereby increasing potential output.

      Candidates who incorrectly label diagrams can be awarded a maximum of [3].

      For AD/AS the vertical axis may be average (general) price level, or price
      level. The horizontal axis may be real output, real national output, real income, real
      national income, real GDP or real Y. Any abbreviations are acceptable. A title is
      not necessary.
                                           – 22 –             N20/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(d)   Using information from the text/data and your knowledge of economics, evaluate
      the use of export promotion as a means of achieving economic development in
      the Philippines.                                                                          [8]

      Examiners should be aware that candidates may take a different approach which, if
      appropriate, should be rewarded.

      Do not award beyond Level 2 if the answer does not contain reference to the information
      provided.

       Level                                                                      Marks
       0       The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors     0
               below.
       1       Few relevant concepts are recognized.                              1–2
               There is basic knowledge/understanding.
       2       Relevant concepts are recognized and developed in reasonable       3–5
               depth.
               There is clear knowledge/understanding.
               There is some attempt at application/analysis.
       3       Relevant concepts are recognized and developed in depth.           6–8
               There is clear knowledge/understanding.
               There is effective application/analysis.
               There is synthesis/evaluation, supported by appropriate theory
               and evidence.

      Command term
      “Evaluate” requires candidates to make an appraisal by weighing up the strengths and
      limitations. Opinions and conclusions should be presented clearly and supported with
      appropriate evidence and sound argument.

      Answers may include:
      • Definitions of economic development, export promotion.
      • The link between export-led growth and economic development.

      Advantages of export promotion may include:
      • The PEDP 2017–2022 wants to boost the export of services, which could bring in more
        export revenue due to its higher value, increasing incomes of workers in numerous
        services, allowing for a better standard of living and higher tax revenue for the
        government (paragraph 3).
      • Increased exports of processed foods rather than unprocessed foods will increase farm
        incomes (paragraph 2).
      • If boosting exports and increasing export competitiveness (such as the standards, testing
        and certification) is successful, then more export revenue should come in (paragraph 3),
        providing the government with more tax revenue which could be spent on development
        objectives.
      • Removing regulations should make it easier for exporters to run their business and to
        export their products (paragraph 3).
      • Investment in the production processes and supply chains (paragraph 3) should reduce
        the costs of production over time and make the goods more export competitive.
      • Exploiting existing and new opportunities from trade agreements (paragraph 3) should
        increase export revenues in sectors that are competitive.
                                     – 23 –              N20/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

• If more is exported, then more can be imported and the tariffs on rice can be lowered,
  benefitting low-income families (paragraph 1).

Disadvantages/limitations of export promotion may include:
• Export promotion could favour economic activities in urban areas which could lead to
   higher prices and wages in these areas, especially in Manila (paragraph 2); higher
   domestic prices and inflation, affecting all families negatively as real incomes and
   purchasing power falls, and therefore lower income families are most negatively affected,
   lowering standards of living, and possibly increasing inequality and poverty.
• Export promotion will be difficult to achieve when investment in much-needed irrigation
   systems that would improve productivity in farming as well as infrastructure to help
   farmers connect to export markets, is discouraged (paragraph 2).
• There is a lack of access to export markets due to the lack of infrastructure, which would
   also hamper export promotion.
• The Philippines lacks the infrastructure needed to attract export-oriented manufacturing
   (paragraph 4) from overseas.
• Other countries may resist increased exports from the Philippines.
• Reliance on a narrow range of exports (such as processed food) may be risky.
• More will be spent on infrastructure by the government. Although the budget may have
   more income from an increase in income tax, poorer households may suffer due to a
   higher indirect tax on a range of goods (paragraph 4).

Any reasonable evaluation.

Candidates may argue that export promotion may lead to economic growth. As long
as they have established a clear link between economic growth and economic
development, such arguments should be fully rewarded.