Trade strategies in the Philippines

     1     For more than 20 years the Philippines has been limiting the volume of rice it imports. However,
           the agreement with the World Trade Organization (WTO) that permitted these restrictions
           expired in 2017. In early 2019, the government replaced the quantity restrictions with tariff
           protection. A 35 % tariff on imported rice from the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
           (ASEAN)* was imposed to protect the domestic rice industry in the Philippines. Following the
           replacement of the quota with a tariff, rice prices are expected to fall significantly. However,
           urban households want the president to allow rice to be imported without any tariffs to reduce
           food bills even further.

     2     The poorest quintile of households in the Philippines consumes nearly twice as much ordinary
           rice and 20 times more National Food Authority (NFA) rice compared to the richest quintile.
           Rising food prices are pushing up inflation as a result of increasing salaries in urban areas.
           The daily minimum wage in Manila, the Philippine capital, will increase by 4.9%, the highest
           hike in six years, to the equivalent of US$10.11. Farming and fishing provide the livelihoods
           for around one-third of the labour force in the Philippines. Land reform programmes are slowly
           being implemented to change the current situation of unfair ownership of land and resources
           by a few individuals. However, uncertainty continues to discourage investment in adequate
           irrigation systems in the countryside. As an agricultural country, irrigation in the Philippines is
           very important. Improvements in the quality of infrastructure services will help cut the cost of
           doing business, attract more investment, and enhance productivity around the country. Food
           manufacturing, including food and beverage processing, remains the most dominant primary
           industry in the Philippines. This has become a focus in the hope of increasing farm incomes,
           because this part of the economy is currently dominated by big international companies. Major
           exports of processed fruits and nuts include mangos, pineapples, bananas and peanuts.

     3     The Philippine Export Development Plan (PEDP) 2018–2022 calls for boosting the export of
           services, increasing export competitiveness, and exploring new markets. Efforts have already
           been made to harmonize the country’s standards, testing, certification and quality accreditation
           of products to improve trade and comply with standards in the European Union. The PEDP aims
           to increase the volume and value of exports by encouraging investment in production processes
           and supply chains. Another strategy to achieve the plan’s objective is to exploit existing and new
           opportunities from trade agreements.

     4     The Philippines lacks the infrastructure needed to attract export-oriented manufacturing.
           To support the PEDP, the government needs to increase its spending on new airports, roads
           and bridges. These public works are critical to boosting the incomes of people in poorer areas
           by connecting them better to Manila. To allow for this extra spending, a series of tax reforms
           was started: the income tax for the highest income earners has been raised from 30 % to 35 %,
           and indirect taxes have been increased.

* ASEAN consists of Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia,
  Myanmar (Burma), Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam.

(This question continues on the following page)
                                               – 11 –                                       8820 – 5113


(Question 4 continued)

     (a)   (i)	State two functions of the World Trade Organization (WTO) (paragraph 1).[2]

           (ii)   Define the term inflation indicated in bold in the text (paragraph 2).[2]

     (b)   Using a Lorenz curve diagram, explain the possible impact on the distribution of income
           in the Philippines when “the income tax for the highest income earners has been raised
           from 30 % to 35 %” (paragraph 4).[4]

     (c)   Using an AD/AS diagram, explain the impact on the potential output of the Philippines
           of the government increasing its “spending on new airports, roads and bridges”
           (paragraph 4).[4]

     (d)   Using information from the text/data and your knowledge of economics, evaluate
           the use of export promotion as a means of achieving economic development in
           the Philippines.                                                                        [8]




References:

Figure 1 Adapted from Anon, n.d. Argentina Current Account, Trading Economics,
         https://tradingeconomics.com/argentina/current-account.

2.        Adapted from Tang, F. and Wang, O., 2019. China prepares for testing 2019 by freeing up US$210 billion in latest
          move to boost ailing economy. South China Morning Post, https://www.scmp.com/economy/china-economy/
          article/2180758/china-prepares-testing-2019-freeing-us210-billion-latest-move; and Donnan, S., 2019. U.S.-China
          Negotiations Risk Shutting Out the Rest of the World. Bloomberg Businessweek, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/
          articles/2019-02-28/u-s-china-negotiations-risk-shutting-the-rest-of-the-world-out. Used with permission of Bloomberg
          LLP Copyright © 2021. All rights reserved.

3.        © International Baccalaureate Organization 2020.

4.        Adapted from Philippines News Agency, “Proposed Ph Export Plan Backs PDP 2017-2022 Targets”, June 21, 2018,
          https://www.pna.gov.ph/articles/1039017.