Angola’s economic reforms

        Following an oil price crash in 2014, Angola has endured a recession, a dramatic rise in
         inflation and empty supermarket shelves caused by severe shortages of foreign currency.
         Angola is highly dependent on export revenues from oil production, a major source of United
         States dollars. The foreign currency is needed to import manufactured goods because the
         country’s manufacturing sector is small.

        To respond to these challenges, the president of Angola has presented a plan with
         desperately needed reforms to promote economic development. The plan proposes tax
         incentives to attract foreign investment and privatization of the telecommunication and
         railway sectors. It also aims to expand infrastructure projects with private sector involvement.
         In addition, reforms are recommended to make the banking sector stronger. This is important
         if the government wants to reduce the borrowing costs experienced by Angolan businesses.

        The recent 20 % devaluation of the kwanza (Angola’s currency) is another sign that the
         government is serious about making Angola attractive to foreign direct investment (FDI).
         Angola has a fixed exchange rate. As the kwanza has been overvalued, this has caused a
         reduction in foreign currency reserves.

        Angola’s future economic growth is likely to be low. The business environment for firms
         remains difficult. High borrowing costs, corruption and poor infrastructure remain challenges.
         The government has failed to exploit Angola’s vast agricultural potential. The country
         depends heavily on oil revenues, which are falling.

        Living conditions for households are also poor as inflation is expected to remain above
         25 %. Approximately 40 % of Angolans live in absolute poverty and unemployment is
         high, especially in rural areas. Aware of the urgent need to reduce regional inequality, the
         government has announced plans to encourage investment in rural areas. However, there
         are also proposals to reduce public debt by removing some subsidies on food and by
         introducing ad valorem taxes.

        Although Angola’s economic growth has been slow, it remains the third-largest economy in
         sub-Saharan Africa and the government is the second-largest public spender in the region.



(This question continues on the following page)
                                                –7–                                          2221 – 5113


(Question 3 continued)

     (a)   (i)	Define the term recession indicated in bold in the text (paragraph ).[2]

           (ii)   Define the term privatization indicated in bold in the text (paragraph ).[2]

     (b)   Using a demand and supply diagram, explain the impact on households of “removing
           some subsidies on food” (paragraph ).[4]

     (c)   Using a Lorenz curve diagram, explain the likely impact on income distribution of “plans
           to encourage investment in rural areas” (paragraph ).[4]

     (d)   Using information from the text/data and your knowledge of economics, evaluate the
           effectiveness of market-oriented policies in achieving economic development in Angola.   [8]




                                                                                             Turn over
                                                      –8–                                           2221 – 5113