22
NII/4/PHYSIMHPS/ENGITZO/XX
Option H = Relativity
Hl. This question is about special relativity, simultaneity and length contraction:
a
One of the two postulates of special relativity may be stated as:
"The laws of physics are the same for all observers in inertial reference frames.
State
what is meant by an inertial frame of reference.
(ii) the other postulate of special relativity:
This question continues on the following page)
2240
23
NII/4/PHYSIMHPS/ENGITZO/XX
(Question HI continued)
b
In a thought experiment to illustrate the concept of simultaneity, Vladimir is standing on the ground close to a straight; level railway track: Natasha is in a railway carriage that is travelling along the railway track with constant speed v in the direction shown.
Natasha
Vladimir
Natasha is sitting on a chair that is equidistant from each end of the carriage. At either end of the  carriage are two   clocks C1 and Cz Next to Natasha is a switch that; when   operated, sends a signal to each clock: The clocks register the time of arrival of the signals. At the instant that  Natasha   and Vladimir are opposite  each  other; Natasha operates the switch: According to Natasha, € , and Cz register the same time of arrival of each signal:
Explain, according to Vladimir,  whether OT not C and C2 register the same time of arrival for each signal. [4
This question continues on the following page)
Turn over
2340
24
NII/4/PHYSIMHPS/ENGITZO/XX
(Question HL continued)
The speed v of the carriage is 0.70c. Vladimir measures the length of the table at which Natasha is sitting to be 1.0m:
Calculate the length of the table as measured by Natasha.
[3]
(ii) Explain which observer measures the proper length of the table:
This question continues on the following page)
2440
25
NII/4/PHYSIMHPS/ENGITZO/XX
(Question HI continued)
According to Vladimir; a clock at rest in the railway carriage will appear to run slower than a clock at rest beside him: However; according to Natasha, Vladimir's clock will run slower than a clock at rest beside her:
Outline how this time dilation phenomenon leads to the "twin paradox" in which one of the twins embarks on a return journey to a distant star at a speed close to that of light whilst the other twin remains 0n Earth: [3]
(ii) State the reason behind the resolution of the paradox.
This question continues on the following page)
Turn over
2540
26
NII/4/PHYSIMHPS/ENGITZO/XX
(Question HL continued)
Evidence for time   dilation comes   from the decay of muons. pulse of muons produced by cosmic radiation in the upper atmosphere of Earth travels to Earth with a speed of 0.96c as measured by an observer at rest on the surface of Earth: The half-life of the muons, as measured in the frame of reference in which the muons are at rest; is 3.1x10 S.
Determine for the muons, the distance that Earth will have   travelled towards them after half of the muons in the pulse have decayed:
(ii) Calculate   for the Earth   observer; the distance that the muon pulse will  have travelled towards Earth after half of the muons in the pulse have decayed. [2]
Suggest  how your answers to (e)i) and (e)(ii) provide  evidence that  supports the theory of special relativity. [3]
2640