(a)   (i)    Define the term appreciation indicated in bold in the text (paragraph ).    [2]

       Level                                                                           Marks
       0          The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors       0
                  below.
       1          Vague definition.                                                    1
                  The idea that a currency is worth more or the idea that the
                  exchange rate rises.
       2          Accurate definition.                                                 2
                  An explanation that it is an increase in the value (price) of one
                  currency (in terms of another currency) plus one of the following:
                   in a floating exchange rate system
                   as a result of a movement in market forces.

           (ii)   Define the term monetary policy indicated in bold in the text
                  (paragraph ).                                                               [2]

       Level                                                                           Marks
       0          The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors       0
                  below.
       1          Vague definition.                                                    1
                  The idea that is to do with interest rates (or money supply).
       2          Accurate definition.                                                 2
                  An explanation that it is any two of the following:
                   demand-side policy
                   enacted by the central bank
                   changes in interest rates
                   changes in money supply.
                                             –9–     M19/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(b)   Using an AD/AS diagram, explain how increased import expenditure might affect
      economic growth in the Indian economy (paragraph ).                              [4]

  Level                                                                         Marks
  0        The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors       0
           below.
  1        There is a correct diagram OR an accurate written response.          1–2
           An AD/AS diagram showing a shift of the AD curve to the left
           and a fall in the level of national income OR an explanation
           that the increased import expenditure will reduce net exports,
           a component of AD, thus reducing AD and reducing economic
           growth.
  2        There is a correct diagram AND an accurate written response.         3–4
           An AD/AS diagram showing a shift of the AD curve to the left
           and a fall in the level of national income AND an explanation
           that the increased import expenditure will reduce net exports,
           a component of AD, thus reducing AD and reducing economic
           growth.

      Candidates who incorrectly label diagrams can be awarded a maximum of [3].

      For AD/AS, the vertical axis may be price level or average price level.
      The horizontal axis may be output, real output, national output, real national
      output, national income, or real GDP. A title is not necessary.

          Price level

                                             SRAS

           PL1
           PL2

                                                     AD1
                                               AD2

                                                        Real GDP
                                 Y2     Y1
                                              – 10 –     M19/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(c)   Using an exchange rate diagram, explain how reducing interest rates might lead
      to a fall in the value of the rupee (paragraph ).                                        [4]

  Level                                                                             Marks
  0        The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors           0
           below.
  1        There is a correct diagram OR an accurate written response.              1–2
           An exchange rate diagram showing a shift of the supply curve to
           the right and a fall in the value of the rupee OR an explanation
           that a fall in the interest rate will make saving abroad a better
           option, so increasing the demand for foreign currencies and
           increasing the supply of the rupee on the foreign exchange
           market.
  2        There is a correct diagram AND an accurate written response.             3–4
           An exchange rate diagram showing a shift of the supply curve to
           the right and a fall in the value of the rupee AND an explanation
           that a fall in the interest rate will make saving abroad a better
           option, so increasing the demand for foreign currencies and
           increasing the supply of the rupee on the foreign exchange
           market.

      Candidates may state that reducing interest rates means that overall there has
      been less demand for the rupee because foreign depositors have less incentive
      to deposit their money in Indian banks, thus causing a shift in the demand curve
      to the left and a fall in the value of the rupee. If properly explained, with a correct
      diagram, then this approach may be fully rewarded.

      Candidates who incorrectly label diagrams can be awarded a maximum of [3].

      For an exchange rate diagram, the vertical axis may be exchange rate, price of
      rupee in another currency, other currency/rupee or other currency per rupee. The
      horizontal axis should be quantity, or quantity of rupee. A title is not necessary.

              Price of rupee
              in US$
                                                    S1        S2

                    Xr1

                    Xr2
                                                    D
                                                                   Quantity of rupee
                                           – 11 –    M19/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(d)   Using information from the text/data and your knowledge of economics, discuss
      the possible economic consequences of the increasing value of the rupee for India’s
      inflation rate, employment, economic growth and current account balance.            [8]

      Examiners should be aware that candidates may take a different approach which,
      if appropriate, should be rewarded.

      Do not award beyond level 2 if the answer does not contain reference to the
      information provided.

  Level                                                                        Marks
  0        The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors      0
           below.
  1        Few relevant concepts are recognized.                               1–2
           There is basic knowledge/understanding.
  2        Relevant concepts are recognized and developed in reasonable        3–5
           depth.
           There is clear knowledge/understanding.
           There is some attempt at application/analysis.
  3        Relevant concepts are recognized and developed in reasonable        6–8
           depth.
           There is clear knowledge/understanding.
           There is effective application/analysis.
           There is synthesis/evaluation, supported by appropriate theory
           and evidence.

      Command term
      “Discuss” requires candidates to offer a considered and balanced review that
      includes a range of arguments, factors, or hypotheses. Opinions or conclusions
      should be presented clearly and supported by appropriate evidence.

      Responses may include:
       definitions of appreciation, inflation, employment, economic growth, current
        account.

      Inflation rate:
       the inflation rate may decrease due to cost-push deflation caused by lower
         prices of imported goods (paragraph )
       the inflation rate may decrease due to cost-push deflation caused by lower
         prices of imported raw materials and semi-finished goods (paragraph )
       the central bank may reduce interest rates to lower the value of the rupee
         (paragraph ), causing an expansion of AD and demand-pull inflation
       the above points may have an off-setting effect on the level of inflation
       excess liquidity in the financial markets (paragraph ) may also be inflationary
       demand-pull inflation falls due to lower AD since net exports fall.

      Employment:
       increased export prices (paragraph ) may lead to falling demand for exports
        (paragraph  and paragraph ) and so an increase in unemployment in
        export industries and in industries that compete with imports (due to lower
        import prices)
       decreased import prices (paragraph ) may lower costs for firms using
        imported raw materials and semi-finished goods, thus lowering prices,
        increasing demand, and leading to higher employment.
                                      – 12 –    M19/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

Economic growth:
 the overall effect of higher export prices and lower import prices (paragraph
  ) might lead to a fall in net exports, as explained in (b), causing a fall in
  growth
 strong capital inflows (paragraph ) might offset the above if the funds are
  used for investment in capital goods as increased investment shifts AD to the
  right, causing growth
 a slowdown in exports has slowed economic expansion and real GDP growth
  has fallen to 5.7%, the lowest for more than three years (paragraph ).

Current account balance:
 purchase of reserve assets might be necessary to compensate for the current
  account deficit (paragraph )
 higher export prices may lead to reduced export revenue and lower import
  prices to increased import expenditure harming the current account balance
 if the central bank reduces the value of the rupee (paragraph ), then the US
  may retaliate with protectionist measures that would harm the current account
  balance (and employment/economic growth)
 the capital inflows that caused the appreciation (paragraph ) will lead to
  future debits under the current account (income flows).

To reach level 3, students must be aware of the particular situation in the Indian
economy, not just present an evaluation of a high exchange rate in general.
                                                  – 13 –   M19/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

                                            Section B