(a)   Explain why the price elasticity of demand for primary commodities tends
           to be relatively low while the price elasticity of demand for manufactured
           products tends to be relatively high.                                             [10 marks]

           Answers may include:
           • definitions of price elasticity of demand, primary commodities and
             manufactured products
           • application of theory of price elasticity of demand to primary commodities
             and manufactured products, explaining high and low PED, including
             reference to factors that determine the price elasticity of demand of primary
             products and of manufactured goods, eg, degree of necessity, availability of
             substitutes
           • diagrams to show the different degrees of price elasticity of demand
           • examples of primary commodities and manufactured products to which this
             might be, or has been, applied.

                                         Assessment Criteria
     Part (a) 10 marks

     Level                                                                                       Marks
       0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.                    0

       1 There is little understanding of the specific demands of the question.
         Relevant economic terms are not defined.
         There is very little knowledge of relevant economic theory.
         There are significant errors.                                                            1–3

       2 There is some understanding of the specific demands of the question.
         Some relevant economic terms are defined.
         There is some knowledge of relevant economic theory.
         There are some errors.                                                                   4–6

       3 There is understanding of the specific demands of the question.
         Relevant economic terms are defined.
         Relevant economic theory is explained and applied.
         Where appropriate, diagrams are included and applied.
         Where appropriate, examples are used.
         There are few errors.                                                                    7–8

       4 There is clear understanding of the specific demands of the question.
         Relevant economic terms are clearly defined.
         Relevant economic theory is clearly explained and applied.
         Where appropriate, diagrams are included and applied effectively.
         Where appropriate, examples are used effectively.
         There are no significant errors.                                                         9–10
                                            –4–              M13/3/ECONO/SP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M

(b)   “The income elasticity of demand for primary products tends to be
      lower than that for manufactured products and services.” Examine the
      implications of this for producers and for the economy as a whole.                [15 marks]

      N.B. It should be noted that definitions, theory and examples that have already
      been given in part (a), and then referred to in part (b), should be rewarded.

      Answers may include:
      • definitions of income elasticity of demand, primary products and
        manufactured products/services; explanation of low YED
      • application of theory of income elasticity of demand to primary products,
        manufactured products and services; distinction between income inelastic
        and income elastic goods and services in relation to primary products,
        manufactured products and services
      • diagrams to show the possible impact on demand with appropriate
        explanation
      • examples of goods with different income elasticities of demand, perhaps
        related to ELDCs and EMDCs
      • synthesis or evaluation (examine).

      Examination may include: a consideration of the different implications for
      producers in terms of the rate of expansion of industries and hence future
      profitability; the implications for resource allocation; the implications for
      relative growth rates of the primary, secondary and tertiary sectors of the
      economy; the different effects for ELDCs and EMDCs; an evaluation of the
      significance of income elasticity of demand for firms and the economy as a
      whole.

      Examiners should be aware that candidates may take a different approach
      which, if appropriate, should be rewarded.

      Opinions or conclusions should be presented clearly and supported by
      appropriate examples.
                                            –5–              M13/3/ECONO/SP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M

                                    Assessment Criteria
Part (b) 15 marks

Level                                                                             Marks

  0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.          0

  1 There is little understanding of the specific demands of the question.
    Relevant economic terms are not defined.
    There is very little knowledge of relevant economic theory.
    There are significant errors.                                                  1–5

  2 There is some understanding of the specific demands of the question.
    Some relevant economic terms are defined.
    There is some knowledge of relevant economic theory.
    There are some errors.                                                         6–9

  3 There is understanding of the specific demands of the question.
    Relevant economic terms are defined.
    Relevant economic theory is explained and applied.
    Where appropriate, diagrams are included and applied.
    Where appropriate, examples are used.
    There is an attempt at synthesis or evaluation.
    There are few errors.                                                         10–12

  4 There is clear understanding of the specific demands of the question.
    Relevant economic terms are clearly defined.
    Relevant economic theory is clearly explained and applied.
    Where appropriate, diagrams are included and applied effectively.
    Where appropriate, examples are used effectively.
    There is evidence of appropriate synthesis or evaluation.
    There are no significant errors.                                              13–15
                                                –6–              M13/3/ECONO/SP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M