(a)   (i)    Define the term absolute poverty indicated in bold in the text (paragraph ).   [2]

       Level                                                                            Marks
       0          The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors        0
                  below.
       1          Vague definition.                                                     1
                  The idea that it is when a person struggles to survive OR that
                  income is below a certain threshold level (such as $1.90 per
                  day).
       2          Accurate definition.                                                  2
                  An explanation that it is when people live below a certain level of
                  income that is necessary to meet basic needs.

           (ii)   Define the term foreign direct investment (FDI) indicated in bold in the text
                  (paragraph ).                                                                  [2]

       Level                                                                            Marks
       0          The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors        0
                  below.
       1          Vague definition.                                                     1
                  The idea that it is investment between countries.
       2          Accurate definition.                                                  2
                  An explanation that it is any two of the following:
                   long-term investment in another country
                   investment by a multinational corporation (MNC)
                   investment in another country representing at least 10%
                     ownership
                   investment in productive facilities.
                                         – 19 –   M19/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(b)   Explain two reasons why Chinese companies may have been attracted into Peru
      (paragraph ).                                                                    [4]

       Level                                                                    Marks
       0       The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors   0
               below.
       1       The written response is limited.                                 1–2
               For explaining one of the following reasons:
                sensible macroeconomic policies promote a stable business
                  environment
                reforms of environmental regulations designed to increase
                  investment
                rising employment and/or income increases the potential
                  sales of Chinese Companies
                Peru’s government is expected to increase public investment,
                  making it easier for Chinese companies to move goods and
                  resources, reducing costs
                low political risk reduces uncertainty and promotes a stable
                  business environment
                access for Chinese companies to geographically-specific
                  resources to increase production
                lower wages of workers.
       2       The written response is accurate.                                3–4
               For explaining any two of the following reasons:
                sensible macroeconomic policies promote a stable business
                  environment
                reforms of environmental regulations designed to increase
                  investment
                rising employment and/or income increases the potential
                  sales of Chinese Companies
                Peru’s government is expected to increase public investment,
                  making it easier for Chinese companies to move goods and
                  resources, reducing costs
                low political risk reduces uncertainty and promotes a stable
                  business environment
                access for Chinese companies to geographically-specific
                  resources to increase production
                lower wages of workers.
                                            – 20 –   M19/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(c)   Using a poverty cycle diagram, explain how increased foreign direct investment
      might break the cycle (paragraph ).                                                  [4]

  Level                                                                         Marks
  0        The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors       0
           below.
  1        There is a correct diagram OR an accurate written response.          1–2
           For drawing a poverty cycle diagram (including investment),
           beginning and ending in an indicator of poverty OR an
           explanation of how FDI will break the cycle (by closing the
           savings gap which would increase the level of investment, by
           providing employment opportunities which raise income).
  2        There is a correct diagram AND an accurate written response.         3–4
           For drawing a poverty cycle diagram (including investment),
           beginning and ending in an indicator of poverty AND an
           explanation of how FDI will break the cycle (by closing the
           savings gap which would increase the level of investment, by
           providing employment opportunities which raise income).

      Example of poverty cycle (any cycle, starting and ending with an indicator of poverty, is
      acceptable):
                                            – 21 –   M19/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(d)   Using information from the text/data and your knowledge of economics,
      evaluate the factors that may allow Peru to continue to achieve high rates of
      economic growth in the future.                                                    [8]

      Examiners should be aware that candidates may take a different approach which,
      if appropriate, should be rewarded.

      Do not award beyond level 2 if the answer does not contain reference to the
      information provided.
  Level                                                                        Marks
  0        The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors      0
           below.
  1        Few relevant concepts are recognized.                               1–2
           There is basic knowledge/understanding.
  2        Relevant concepts are recognized and developed in reasonable        3–5
           depth.
           There is clear knowledge/understanding.
           There is some attempt at application/analysis.
  3        Relevant concepts are recognized and developed in reasonable        6–8
           depth.
           There is clear knowledge/understanding.
           There is effective application/analysis.
           There is synthesis/evaluation, supported by appropriate theory
           and evidence.

      Command term
      “Evaluate” requires candidates to make an appraisal by weighing up the
      strengths and limitations. Opinions and conclusions should be presented clearly
      and supported with appropriate evidence and sound argument.
                                     – 22 –   M19/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

Responses may include:
 definition of economic growth.

Factors affecting economic growth:
 deregulation should increase investment (paragraph ) and so will lead to an
  increase in AD and thus economic growth, however, there are the dangers of
  pollution and poorer working conditions (paragraph )
 growth could be limited if loose environmental regulations cause, for example,
  pollution that harms health and therefore workers' productivity (paragraph )
 growth in employment and income (paragraph ) should lead to increases in
  consumption and so AD, however, this will only continue if the economy keeps
  growing
 higher mining export volumes (paragraph ) should continue to provide
  economic growth, however, this will be dependent on continued growth in the
  global economy
 FDI (paragraph ) could fill the investment gap, shifting AD and increasing
  economic growth, however, FDI has several negative aspects and its
  continuation will be dependent on the situation in the economies providing it,
  eg “deceleration of China’s economic growth (paragraph )
 free trade (paragraph ), with continued trade surpluses, will provide
  continued economic growth, but is once again dependent on the state of the
  world economy and on the trade policies of other countries
 increased public investment (paragraph ) should create economic growth,
  but will it be enough to outweigh “the lower growth rate in the mining sector
  and weak private investment” (paragraph )
 external shocks in commodities prices (paragraph ) could negatively affect
  future export earnings
 a further deceleration of China’s economic growth (paragraph ) could affect
  demand for commodities from the main trading partner and FDI (paragraph )
 unpredictability in world capital markets (paragraph ) could affect investment
 the threat of tight (contractionary) monetary policy in the US (paragraph )
  could lead to a slowdown in the US economy and hence reduce the demand
  for commodities from the second main trading partner (paragraph )
 tight (contractionary) monetary policy in the US (paragraph ) could lead to
  an outflow of savings to the US, reducing funds available for investment in
  Peru.

To reach level 3, students must be aware of the particular situation in the
economy of Peru, not just present a discussion of growth factors in general.