(a)   (i)    Define the term inflation indicated in bold in the text (paragraph ).                 [2]

            Level                                                                          Marks
            0         The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors       0
                      below.
            1         Vague definition.                                                    1
                      The idea that it is an increase in prices in the economy.
            2         Accurate definition.                                                 2
                      An explanation that it is a sustained increase in the average
                      (general) price level in the economy.
                      For 2 marks there must be some indication of time eg sustained,
                      persistent, continuous.

           (ii)   Define devaluation indicated in bold in the text (paragraph ).                        [2]

            Level                                                                          Marks
            0         The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors       0
                      below.
            1         Vague definition.                                                    1
                      The idea that a currency is worth less or the idea that the
                      exchange rate falls
            2         Accurate definition.                                                 2
                      An explanation that it is a decrease in the value (price) of one
                      currency (in terms of another currency) plus one of the following:
                      • in a fixed exchange rate system
                      • as a result of government or central bank intervention.

     (b)   Using an exchange rate diagram, explain how the central bank could “use its
           foreign reserves” to restore the value of the naira (paragraph ).                            [4]

            Level                                                                          Marks
            0         The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors       0
                      below.
            1         There is a correct diagram or an accurate written response.          1–2
                      An exchange rate diagram showing a shift in the demand curve
                      to the right and an increase in the value of the naira or an
                      explanation that the central bank (uses its reserves to) buy the
                      naira thus bringing about an appreciation of its currency to
                      restore its minimum value.
            2         There is a correct diagram and an accurate written response.         3–4
                      An exchange rate diagram showing a shift in the demand curve
                      to the right and an increase in the value of the naira and an
                      explanation that the central bank (uses its reserves to) buy the
                      naira thus bringing about an appreciation of its currency to
                      restore its minimum value.

           Candidates who incorrectly label diagrams can be awarded a maximum of [3].

           For an exchange rate diagram the vertical axis may be exchange rate, price of naira in
           dollars, or US dollars per naira, or USD/naira, or naira/USD. The horizontal axis should be
           quantity or quantity of naira or quantity of naira traded. A title is not necessary.
                                             –9–     N18/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

               Price of
               naira in
               US$                                  SSnaira

                      Xr2

                      Xr1

                                                                DD’naira
                                                      DDnaira
                                                                       Quantity of naira

(c)   Using an AD/AS diagram, explain how a decision to “tighten monetary policy” might be
      harmful to the economy (paragraph ).                                                        [4]

       Level                                                                               Marks
       0        The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors             0
                below.
       1        There is a correct diagram or an accurate written response.                1–2
                AD/AS diagram showing a shift of the AD curve to the left and a
                decrease in real GDP or an explanation that higher interest
                rates or a reduced (rate of growth of the) money supply would
                reduce consumption and/or investment therefore causing a fall
                in AD and a fall in real GDP (increase in unemployment).
       2        There is a correct diagram and an accurate written response.               3–4
                AD/AS diagram showing a shift of the AD curve to the left and a
                decrease in real GDP and an explanation that higher interest
                rates or a reduced (rate of growth of the) money supply would
                reduce consumption and/or investment therefore causing a fall
                in AD and a fall in real GDP (increase in unemployment).

      Candidates who incorrectly label diagrams can be awarded a maximum of [3].

      For AD/AS, the vertical axis may be “average (general) price level”, “APL” or “price
      level”. For the horizontal axis, “real output”, “real national output”, “real income”,
      “real national income”, “real GDP” or “real Y”. Any abbreviations are acceptable. A
      title is not necessary. “AS” is a valid label for the SRAS curve.

                          Price Level

                                                          SRAS
                            PL1
                           PL2

                                                                      AD1

                                                                AD2
                                                                    Real GDP
                                                Y2    Y1
(d)   Evaluate the likely effects of Nigeria’s change from a fixed exchange rate system to a
      managed exchange rate system.                                                                [8]
                                      – 10 –    N18/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

Examiners should be aware that candidates may take a different approach which,
if appropriate, should be rewarded.

Do not award beyond Level 2 if the answer does not contain reference to the
information provided.

 Level                                                                         Marks
 0        The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors       0
          below.
 1        Few relevant concepts are recognized.                                1–2
          There is basic knowledge/understanding.
 2        Relevant concepts are recognized and developed in reasonable         3–5
          depth.
          There is clear knowledge/understanding.
          There is some attempt at application/analysis.
 3        Relevant concepts are recognized and developed in reasonable         6–8
          depth.
          There is clear knowledge/understanding.
          There is effective application/analysis.
          There is synthesis/evaluation, supported by appropriate theory
          and evidence.

Command term
“Evaluate” requires candidates to make an appraisal by weighing up the strengths
and limitations. Opinions and conclusions should be presented clearly and
supported with appropriate evidence and sound argument.

Responses may include:
• definitions of fixed and managed exchange rate systems.

Strengths:
• Will not need to use foreign currency reserves as much, which have fallen, to
   control the exchange rate (paragraph ).
• The lower exchange rate should improve the balance of trade and so increase
   aggregate demand, helping to combat the negative economic growth
   (paragraph ).
• The lower exchange rate may attract foreign investment.
• Interest rates will be free for use in other policies.
• Could reduce levels of speculation.
• Lower export prices and higher import prices may increase AD and cause
   economic growth (paragraph ).
• Could encourage import substitution (paragraph ) and help to diversify the
   Nigerian economy.

Limitations:
• There may still be some need to use reserves to maintain the “managed float”
  (paragraph ).
• The fall in the value of the naira will raise the prices of imported necessity goods,
  negatively affecting poverty.
• Increased uncertainty and harder to plan ahead which may limit the inflow of FDI.
• The falling value of the naira may cause cost-push inflation/imported inflation
  (paragraph ).
• There may be a need for a tighter monetary policy to deal with the higher
  inflation. This would increase the exchange rate and undo many of the benefits
  (paragraph ).
                                      – 11 –   N18/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

To reach level 3, students must be aware of the particular situation in the Nigerian
economy, not just present a discussion of changing from a fixed exchange rate to a
floating exchange rate in general.
                                                  – 12 –   N18/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

                                               Section B