Unwanted consequences of United States–China trade war

     1   In order to reduce its trade deficit, the United States (US) announced tariffs of 25 % on imports
         of steel and 10 % on imports of aluminium from various countries in March 2018. The US
         government also accused China of unfair trade practices and wants China to import more
         American-made products.

     2   In July 2018, the first tariff on Chinese imports took effect and the Chinese government
         retaliated with a ban on US soybeans. In response, the US threatened to impose additional
         tariffs on imports worth almost US$300 billion, including a 25 % tariff on cars and car parts.
         This would be very damaging to the Chinese economy, which is slowing down, and workers in
         some provinces have become unemployed.

     3   The trade war has also caused anxiety in the European Union and Australia, which are likely
         to see their trade with China affected. Global trade in goods has been slowing, with exports
         from trade-dependent nations (such as Japan and South Korea) to China declining. Economists
         have estimated that other countries could see exports to China drop by as much as 20 %. As of
         early 2019, Germany’s economy is almost in recession, partly because of the slowing Chinese
         economy. If the US imposes its threatened car tariffs, a recession in Germany is inevitable.

     4   In the US, concerns were raised that the trade war has reduced business confidence. The
         decrease in demand from China, which results partly from trade tensions, has hurt the profits
         of US companies such as Apple Inc. and Caterpillar Inc. On the other hand, consumers and
         producers in the US are switching to domestically-produced goods due to the higher prices of
         some imported products from China.

     5   In an attempt to reduce the risk of a sharp economic slowdown, China’s central bank eased
         monetary policy. Economic data showed that small- and medium-sized manufacturing
         companies saw the largest negative impact from the slowdown of its economy. Therefore, the
         government changed the definition of a “small business”, allowing more firms to have access to
         subsidized lending by state-owned commercial banks.

     6   As the impacts of tax cuts enacted in the US in 2017 are disappearing, the US government is
         becoming more aware that the US economy is hurt by the trade war and is heading towards
         slower growth.

(This question continues on the following page)
                                               –7–                                         8820 – 5113


(Question 2 continued)

     (a)   (i)	Define the term tariff indicated in bold in the text (paragraph 2).[2]

           (ii)   Define the term trade war indicated in bold in the text (paragraph 3).[2]

     (b)   Using an international trade diagram, explain the outcome on US producers of the
           introduction of a tariff on imports from China (paragraph 2).[4]

     (c)   Using an AD/AS diagram, explain the desired impact of China’s “eased monetary
           policy” on its economic growth (paragraph 5).[4]

     (d)   Using information from the text/data and your knowledge of economics, discuss the
           arguments for and against the trade protection measures imposed by the US on China.    [8]




                                                                                          Turn over
                                                     –8–                                            8820 – 5113


                                                 Section B

Answer one question from this section.