(a)     Explain how an increase in interest rates might affect the level of aggregate
             demand in an economy.                                                                     [10]

             Answers may include:
              definitions of interest rate and aggregate demand
              diagram to show how an increase in interest rates reduces aggregate
               demand, real income and price level
              an explanation of how a rise in interest rates might lead to a fall in
               consumption and investment which leads to a fall in aggregate demand, a rise
               in the exchange rate which leads to a fall in exports and subsequently a fall in
               aggregate demand
              examples of where a rise in interest rates has led to a fall in aggregate
               demand.

                                           Assessment Criteria

     Part (a) 10 marks

     Level                                                                                        Marks

       0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.                0

       1     There is little understanding of the specific demands of the question.
             Relevant economic terms are not defined.
             There is very little knowledge of relevant economic theory.
             There are significant errors.                                                        1–3

       2     There is some understanding of the specific demands of the question.
             Some relevant economic terms are defined.
             There is some knowledge of relevant economic theory.
             There are some errors.                                                               4–6

       3     There is understanding of the specific demands of the question.
             Relevant economic terms are defined.
             Relevant economic theory is explained and applied.
             Where appropriate, diagrams are included and applied.
             Where appropriate, examples are used.
             There are few errors.                                                                7–8

       4     There is clear understanding of the specific demands of the question.
             Relevant economic terms are clearly defined.
             Relevant economic theory is clearly explained and applied.
             Where appropriate, diagrams are included and applied effectively.
             Where appropriate, examples are used effectively.
             There are no significant errors.                                                     9–10
                                            – 10 –             M16/3/ECONO/SP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M

(b)   Evaluate the effectiveness of monetary policy when an economy is in deep
      recession.                                                                          [15]

      Answers may include:
       definitions of monetary policy and recession
       diagram to show how a reduction in interest rates leads to a rise in aggregate
        demand causing real income to move towards full employment and dealing
        with the recession
       an explanation of how a reduction in interest rates using monetary policy leads
        to a rise in consumption and investment which increases aggregate demand
        and cause real income to rise towards full employment and dealing with the
        recession
       examples of where expansionary monetary policy has been used to deal with
        a recession
       synthesis and evaluation.

      Evaluation may include: the problems of applying expansionary monetary policy
      because consumption and investment might not respond enough to deal with the
      problem of the recession. Expansionary monetary policy might have negative
      outcomes such as inflation. Expansionary monetary policy has a different effect
      on stakeholders where borrowers gain and savers lose. The effect of monetary
      policy changes over time with aggregate demand responding more in the
      long term.

      N.B. It should be noted that definitions, theory, and examples that have already
      been given in part (a), and then referred to in part (b), should be rewarded.

      Examiners should be aware that candidates may take a different approach which,
      if appropriate, should be rewarded.

      Opinions or conclusions should be presented clearly and should be supported by
      appropriate examples.
                                              – 11 –              M16/3/ECONO/SP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M

                                      Assessment Criteria

Part (b) 15 marks

Level                                                                                  Marks

  0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.           0

  1     There is little understanding of the specific demands of the question.
        Relevant economic terms are not defined.
        There is very little knowledge of relevant economic theory.
        There are significant errors.                                                   1–5

  2     There is some understanding of the specific demands of the question.
        Some relevant economic terms are defined.
        There is some knowledge of relevant economic theory.
        There are some errors.                                                          6–9

  3     There is understanding of the specific demands of the question.
        Relevant economic terms are defined.
        Relevant economic theory is explained and applied.
        Where appropriate, diagrams are included and applied.
        Where appropriate, examples are used.
        There is an attempt at synthesis or evaluation.
        There are few errors.                                                          10–12

  4     There is clear understanding of the specific demands of the question.
        Relevant economic terms are clearly defined.
        Relevant economic theory is clearly explained and applied.
        Where appropriate, diagrams are included and applied effectively.
        Where appropriate, examples are used effectively.
        There is evidence of appropriate synthesis or evaluation.
        There are no significant errors.                                               13–15
                                                   – 12 –              M16/3/ECONO/SP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M