(a)   (i)    List two components of the Human Development Index (HDI) (paragraph ).        [2]

            Level                                                                        Marks
            0         The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors     0
                      below.
            1         The written response is limited.                                   1
                      Any one of the following measures:
                      • life expectancy (at birth)
                      • mean years of schooling (for those aged 25 years and
                         above)
                      • expected years of schooling (for a child of school entrance
                         age, capped at 18 years of age)
                      • GNI per capita (or GDP per capita).
            2         The written response is accurate.                                  2
                      Any two of the following measures:
                      • life expectancy (at birth)
                      • mean years of schooling (for those aged 25 years and
                         above)
                      • expected years of schooling (for a child of school entrance
                         age, capped at 18 years of age)
                      • GNI per capita (or GDP per capita).

           (ii)   Define the term monetary policy indicated in bold in the text (paragraph ).   [2]

            Level                                                                        Marks
            0         The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors     0
                      below.
            1         Vague definition.                                                  1
                      The idea that it is to do with interest rates or money supply
            2         Accurate definition.                                               2
                      An explanation that it is any two of the following:
                      • demand-side policy
                      • enacted by the Central Bank
                      • changes in interest rates
                      • changes in money supply.
                                            – 18 –   N18/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(b)   Using a production possibilities curve (PPC) diagram, explain the effect on economic
      growth of the “destruction of much of the country’s physical, social and human capital”
      (paragraph ).                                                                            [4]

       Level                                                                          Marks
       0       The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors         0
               below.
       1       There is a correct diagram or an accurate written response.            1–2
               A PPC diagram showing an inward shift of the PPC or an
               explanation that the destruction of capital represents a fall in the
               quantity of factors of production (resources); and that this will
               then lead to a fall in production possibilities (potential output).
       2       There is a correct diagram and an accurate written response.           3–4
               A PPC diagram showing an inward shift of the PPC and an
               explanation that the destruction of capital represents a fall in the
               quantity of factors of production (resources); and that this will
               then lead to a fall in production possibilities (potential output).

      Candidates who incorrectly label diagrams can be rewarded with a maximum
      of [3].

      For a PPC, the axes could be two alternative products, one on each axis, eg Good A
      and Good B or Schools and Motor Cars; or two groups of products, eg Consumer
      Goods and Producer Goods.

                        Capital goods

                                                                Consumption goods
                                             – 19 –   N18/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(c)   Using an AD/AS diagram, explain why the “decrease in the prices of imports,
      especially oil” might reduce inflationary pressure (paragraph ).                        [4]

       Level                                                                           Marks
       0        The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors         0
                below.
       1        There is a correct diagram or an accurate written response.            1–2
                An AD/AS diagram showing a shift of the SRAS curve to the
                right and a fall in the average price level or an explanation that a
                fall in the price of imported factors of production will reduce
                costs for firms, reducing inflationary pressure in the economy.

                Candidates may also approach this question in this way:

                An AD/AS diagram showing a shift of the AD curve to the left
                and a fall in the average price level or an explanation that a fall
                in the price of imports would increase spending on imports, a
                component of AD and hence reduce inflationary pressure in the
                economy
       2        There is a correct diagram and an accurate written response.           3–4
                An AD/AS diagram showing a shift of the SRAS curve to the
                right and a fall in the average price level and an explanation that
                a fall in the price of imported factors of production will reduce
                costs for firms, reducing inflationary pressure in the economy.

                Candidates may also approach this question in this way:

                An AD/AS diagram showing a shift of the AD curve to the left
                and a fall in the average price level and an explanation that a fall
                in the price of imports would increase spending on imports, a
                component of AD and hence reduce inflationary pressure in the
                economy

      Candidates who incorrectly label diagrams can be rewarded with a maximum
      of [3].

      For AD/AS, the vertical axis may be “average (general) price level”, “APL” or “price
      level”. For the horizontal axis, “real output”, “real national output”, “real income”,
      “real national income”, “real GDP” or “real Y”. Any abbreviations are acceptable.
      A title is not necessary. “AS” is a valid label for the SRAS curve.

                 Price Level

                                                   SRAS1

                  PL1                                      SRAS2

                  PL2

                                                       AD
                                                               Real GDP
                      0                Y1       Y2
                                           – 20 –   N18/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(d)   Using information from the text/data and your knowledge of economics, evaluate the
      challenges to economic growth and economic development faced by Burundi.                 [8]

      Examiners should be aware that candidates may take a different approach which,
      if appropriate, should be rewarded.

      Do not award beyond Level 2 if the answer does not contain reference to the
      information provided.

       Level                                                                        Marks
       0       The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors       0
               below.
       1       Few relevant concepts are recognized.                                1–2
               There is basic knowledge/understanding.
       2       Relevant concepts are recognized and developed in reasonable         3–5
               depth.
               There is clear knowledge/understanding.
               There is some attempt at application/analysis.
       3       Relevant concepts are recognized and developed in reasonable         6–8
               depth.
               There is clear knowledge/understanding.
               There is effective application/analysis.
               There is synthesis/evaluation, supported by appropriate theory
               and evidence.

      Command term
      “Evaluate” requires candidates to make an appraisal by weighing up the strengths
      and limitations. Opinions and conclusions should be presented clearly and
      supported with appropriate evidence and sound argument.

      Responses may include:
      • definition of economic growth
      • definition of economic development.

      Discussion of factors affecting growth and/or development
      • Landlocked country (paragraph ) making access to markets difficult, and difficult to
         access resources.
      • High population density (paragraph ), affecting the quality of life.
      • Dependence on subsistence agriculture (paragraph ) leads to low incomes.
      • Scarcity of cultivatable land (paragraph ) limiting production of agricultural goods.
      • Destruction of capital (paragraph ) during conflict, expensive to rebuild from
         (limited) public funding.
      • Widespread poverty (paragraph ) and existence of the poverty trap.
      • Per capita gross national income is still very low (paragraph ), despite doubling
         over eight years.
      • Low tax receipts (paragraph ) limit the ability of the government to finance
         development objectives.
      • Over-specialization (paragraph ) on a narrow range of (agricultural) exports makes
         Burundi vulnerable to international price changes.
      • Low agricultural export revenue (paragraph ) with low income elasticities and high levels
         of global competition implies lower prospects for growth.
      • Possibility of debt (increasing) due to public spending and a narrow tax base (paragraph
         ).
      • It is likely that inequality is high, because poverty is widespread, which makes
         development more difficult to achieve (paragraph ).
                                    – 21 –   N18/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

• However better prospects for growth because of lower import prices and use of
  government monetary and other policies (paragraphs  and ).

Any reasonable discussion.