(a)   (i)    Define the term depreciation indicated in bold in the text (paragraph ).         [2]

            Level                                                                           Marks
            0         The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors        0
                      below.
            1         Vague definition.                                                     1
                      The idea that a currency is worth less or the idea that the
                      exchange rate falls
            2         Accurate definition.                                                  2
                      An explanation that it is a decrease in the value (price) of one
                      currency (in terms of another currency) plus one of the following:
                      • in a floating exchange rate system
                      • as a result of a movement in market forces.

           (ii)   Define the term current account indicated in bold in the text (paragraph ).      [2]

            Level                                                                           Marks
            0         The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors        0
                      below.
            1         Vague definition.                                                     1
                      The idea that it is a measure of money coming into, and going
                      out of, a country from international trade.
            2         Accurate definition.                                                  2
                      An explanation that it is a measure of (the net flow of funds from)
                      trade in goods and services (exports and imports), income and
                      transfers.
                                            –4–      N18/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(b)   Using an exchange rate diagram, explain how “the need to import corn” will affect
      the value of the South African rand (paragraph ).                                     [4]

       Level                                                                         Marks
       0       The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors        0
               below.
       1       There is a correct diagram or an accurate written response.           1–2
               For drawing an exchange rate diagram showing an increase in
               supply of the rand and a fall in the exchange rate or for an
               explanation that the increase in imports of corn would result in
               selling the rand (to buy US dollars), thus increasing the supply of
               the rand and lowering its exchange rate.
       2       There is a correct diagram and an accurate written response.          3–4
               For drawing an exchange rate diagram showing an increase in
               supply of the rand and a fall in the exchange rate and for an
               explanation that the increase in imports of corn would result in
               selling the rand (to buy US dollars), thus increasing the supply of
               the rand and lowering its exchange rate.

      Candidates who incorrectly label diagrams can be awarded a maximum of [3].

      For an exchange rate diagram the vertical axis may be exchange rate, price of rand
      in dollars, or US dollars per rand, or USD/rand, or rand/USD. The horizontal axis
      should be quantity or quantity of rand or quantity of rand traded. A title is not
      necessary.

           Price of
           rand in
           US$                                  SSrand      SS’rand

                   Xr1

                   Xr2
                                                  DDnaira
                                                                 Quantity of rand
                                            –5–       N18/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(c)   Using a demand and supply diagram, explain the effect of government subsidies on
      the US corn market (paragraph ).                                                        [4]

       Level                                                                        Marks
       0       The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors       0
               below.
       1       There is a correct diagram or an accurate written response.          1–2
               For drawing a D&S diagram showing a shift of supply to the
               right, with a decrease in price and an increase in quantity or an
               explanation that a subsidy will cause a decrease in the costs of
               production of US corn farmers, therefore leading to an increase
               in supply, resulting in a lower price and an increased quantity.
       2       There is a correct diagram and an accurate written response.         3–4
               For drawing a D&S diagram showing a shift of supply to the
               right, with a decrease in price and an increase in quantity and
               an explanation that a subsidy will cause a decrease in the costs
               of production of US corn farmers, therefore leading to an
               increase in supply, resulting in a lower price and an increased
               quantity.

      Candidates may include a World Supply Curve/Line and should not be penalized for
      doing so. It may be positioned in such a way as to impede imports or to promote
      exports. Both are valid approaches. So long as the explanation and diagram explain
      why the domestic supply line shifts right and the correct effects on the price and the
      quantity of corn produced in the USA, the answer can receive full marks.

      Candidates who incorrectly label diagrams can be awarded a maximum of [3].

      The use of P and Q on the axes is sufficient for a demand and supply diagram.
      A title is not necessary.

               Price
                                                 SS       SS’

                   P1

                   P2
                                                  DD
                                     Q1     Q2                  Quantity
                                              –6–      N18/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(d)   Evaluate the economic impacts of trade protection in the South African corn market.      [8]

      Examiners should be aware that candidates may take a different approach which,
      if appropriate, should be rewarded.

      Do not award beyond Level 2 if the answer does not contain reference to the
      information provided.

       Level                                                                           Marks
       0        The work does not meet a standard described by the descriptors         0
                below.
       1        Few relevant concepts are recognized.                                  1–2
                There is basic knowledge/understanding.
       2        Relevant concepts are recognized and developed in reasonable           3–5
                depth.
                There is clear knowledge/understanding.
                There is some attempt at application/analysis.
       3        Relevant concepts are recognized and developed in reasonable           6–8
                depth.
                There is clear knowledge/understanding.
                There is effective application/analysis.
                There is synthesis/evaluation, supported by appropriate theory
                and evidence.

      Command term
      “Evaluate” requires candidates to make an appraisal by weighing up the strengths
      and limitations. Opinions and conclusions should be presented clearly and
      supported with appropriate evidence and sound argument.

      Responses may include:
      • a definition of trade protection
      • an international trade diagram to explain impact of requested tariff on consumers,
        producers and importers (paragraph ).

      Advantages:
      • US subsidies distort the functioning of the free market and can result in an
        inefficient allocation of resources.
      • Helps to protect South African corn farmers from unfair practices since US
        subsidies artificially lower the price of US corn imported into South Africa
        (paragraph ).
      • It would prevent a deterioration of South Africa’s current account balance
        since import expenditure falls as the result of decreased corn imports and the
        depreciation of currency (paragraph ).
      • Tariff allows domestic corn farmers to maintain higher revenues / incomes to
        help them to survive the drought (paragraph ).
      • Corn farmers can compete with subsidized US corn that has caused the global
        glut and subsequent low prices.
      • May only be a short-term measure.
      • A source of tax revenue for the South African government.
      • Agriculture is a strategic industry.

      Disadvantages:
      • Domestic supply of corn in South Africa is likely very price inelastic so the tariff
         would not increase domestic production significantly.
      • Tariff will increase input costs for millers and food-related businesses requiring
         corn as an input (paragraph ).
                                      –7–     N18/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

• Impact of rising corn prices on low income households when corn is an
  essential food (paragraph ).
• Tariff will cause rising input costs for livestock producers further increasing
  food prices (paragraph ).
• Corn is likely to be a major input to food manufacturing hence tariff could
  cause decrease in SRAS due to rising input costs and thus cause cost-push
  inflation and lower real GDP.
• Price of South African food exported to other countries will rise in trading
  partner countries.
• Trading partners might retaliate by imposing their own protectionist measures.
• The corn industry is not an infant industry (paragraph ).
• The depreciation of Rand is already reversing the low price of imports.
                                                   –8–     N18/3/ECONO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M